[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Well, right now, when I
look back to my childhood,
I remember positive things.
I actually think that whatever
happened in my childhood,
it has helped shape me into
the person I am today, helped
me to strengthen my
character features,
and to allow me to appreciate
and value everything in life
more.
Surely, there was a
lot of adversities
and a lot of obstacles,
And a lot of doubts not
going around whether
or not I will
be able to succeed
in the tennis world.
That was not as traditional or
popular back in our country.
Even though we're a country of--
you know, we nurture
sports values,
we were a country of
team sports, mostly.
So I was four or five years old
when the first war in-- well,
that I was living in--
happened.
And unfortunately,
that was the war
that separated all the
ex-Yugoslavian countries.
And I haven't been in
the epicenter of it,
but all of the countries
in ex-Yugoslavia
have felt the
consequence of that war.
And in the next
nine and 10 years,
Serbia has been through a
lot of economical trouble.
It was torn by the bombings
later on in the '90s
and embargoes, sanctions,
people waiting in line for just
the most basic things, the
most common things like bread
and milk.
You know, going
underground into shelters
to basically seek for
some kind of safety
because you never knew what
is going to happen next.
So one of the most
dramatic experiences
I've had with my family was
in '99 when we'd been through,
day and night, two and a
half months of bombing.
And it wasn't easy, not just for
us, but for the entire country.
And all our people, we felt a
great compassion and empathy
for everybody and what
they are going through.
And so, you know,
we never-- we didn't
know what tomorrow brings.
We didn't know
whether or not we are
going to still live
because the planes were
flying over our heads.
We're waking up every
single night for two months
and just praying and
hoping that there
is going to be end of that, just
behind the corner, because war
never brought good to anybody.
Whether you're historically
on a winning or losing side,
it doesn't really matter because
there is always something lost.
There's lost lives.
There are lost houses, roofs
overhead, lost close ones.
And you know, just
those things make
you see the life from
a different perspective
and just allow you to kind of
stand still and and rethink
about how you perceive
life, how you approach life.
And I think that kind of
childhood, at that time,
was obviously not
the common one that
was happening in the world
with my own generation.
But as I said at
the beginning, when
I look at it from
this perspective,
I do appreciate it because it
has helped kind of develop me
into the person I am today, into
the tennis player I am today.
It made me hungrier for
achieving goals and dreams
that I've had as a young child.
But on the other hand, it
made me more appreciative,
more humble of the
value of life and what
matters the most, really.
Because my family, as
many, many other families
throughout Serbia
in those eight, nine
years of during '90s, have
fought for a Euro each day.
You know?
So you never knew,
really, whether or not
you're going to have enough
money to feed your family.
I mean, those kind
of circumstances
and situations families had
to face on a daily basis.
So starting from
there, and then--
and being in such a privileged
and blessed position
and situation where
I am today allows
me to have a bit of
perspective in life.
And whenever I would feel
differently today and feel
like something is
not right, I would
try to always go back
and reflect and think
about what my family has been
through, what my people have
been through, and that
makes me, I think,
being even more grateful
about what I have today.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I believe the universe is
always present everywhere,
in every single moment
and day of our lives.
So it was the same case
when I was four years old
and it was a sign of
a destiny, honestly,
to have three tennis
courts being built just
in front of the restaurant
that my parents were
owning and running.
Nobody has ever touched the
tennis racket, prior to me,
in my family.
So there was no tradition,
no heritage of that sport,
even though my father
was a professional skier
and my uncle, my
aunt, and so most
of that part of the family,
they loved being on a mountain
in the snow.
So that's where,
actually, my parents met.
My father was a
skiing instructor
and my mom wanted
to learn how to ski.
And, yeah, so he
used that opportunity
to persuade her
(LAUGHING) into--
you know, into a marriage
and having three sons.
And so it was a wonderful story.
And myself and my two
younger brothers, we
spent a lot of time, whenever we
had from the school in Belgrade
where we lived,
to be in Kopaonik,
the mountain where my parents
were running a restaurant.
So I think it was back
in 1991, You know,
there was a field just in
front of the restaurant.
We were having a restaurant
already for a couple of years,
and they just decided to make
three tennis courts there.
And you know, obviously,
I as a four, four
and a half year-old
child, I'm very curious,
as any other child.
And you know, I started
going there and asking
the workers what is going on.
They explained to
me that they're
building a tennis court.
I was bringing drinks for free.
In return, they
promised me I would
participate in the creation
of the tennis courts.
So I had it all,
and I was so blessed
to be part of that
experience of creating,
actually, an actual
tennis court.
And then seeing it
on the TV and then
asking my father to buy me a
tennis racquet and everything
else is a history, after that.
I truly believe
that the universe
has a big say in our lives.
And I am so grateful that I was
able to play the sport that I
truly love, even today, and
that love and flair inside of me
has stayed all the
way till today.
So and that's where I extract
the most, I would say,
joy and happiness
of playing tennis.
And my main motivation
is the very same feeling
that was created inside of me
as a spark when I saw tennis
on the TV and in
front of my eyes.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I was very fortunate to have
great support of my parents.
First of all, we
have to understand
that tennis is an expensive
sport for any country.
For any part of the world, for
that matter, but especially
for Serbia at that time
of economic crisis and,
you know, just fighting for
survival financially, each day.
And so my parents had to
make a lot of sacrifices
and they had to really
strongly believe
in my talents and abilities
and my willpower to keep going
and keep playing tennis.
Well, for the first
several years,
from when I was four
to seven, I was mostly
involved in Teddy Tennis-- you
know, school tennis with kids--
and just playing
around the court
being in the big
groups of children,
being part of the
tennis camps that
were coming to that mountain
where we spent a lot of time,
and then going back to
Belgrade where we lived in.
A couple times a week, I
would go for tennis lessons.
But, yeah, I never thought of
it, those early beginnings,
as training as a commitment
or something I have to do,
my job, or work.
It was play.
It was a game.
It was fun, and I was
so joyful every time
I would step onto the court and
hold the racket because I truly
fell in love with the sport.
And that kind of
love, you know, it
led me to spend as much time as
possible on the tennis court.
And when I was
seven, I think that's
the first time that I really
had that clear vision of what
I wanted to achieve and who
I wanted to become in tennis.
And it's mostly
because the base of who
I am as a tennis player
and the foundations
of, my perception
of the tennis world
came from a very passionate
and knowledgeable person,
Jelena Gencic, who was a
big influence in my life,
next to my parents, the
biggest at that time.
And unfortunately, she has
passed away, several years ago,
but she was so
devoted to the sport.
She was a one national
team handball goalkeeper.
She went to Olympic Games.
She was playing for a
Fed Cup of Yugoslavia.
She was a coach of Fed Cup.
She was coach of Monica Seles.
She was traveling
with Goran Ivanisevic,
so she had a very rich history,
and not just in tennis,
but sports overall.
She was very respected and
appreciated in society of sport
in ex-Yugoslavian region, so I
was so fortunate to meet her.
And she has recognized
the potential
that I have and shared
that with my parents.
And even though such
a credible person
has shared that information
with my parents,
I was still only
six, seven years old.
So you know, it was
really hard for my parents
to evaluate the situation
and say whether or not
we're going to
step in and really
support him in this intention.
Because I, even
though I was seven,
I just knew I wanted to become
number one and win Wimbledon.
And I had such a clear
vision in my mind,
I was even creating this
Wimbledon trophy out
of some plastic materials
and then just a little paper
and just trying to create
visions and images in my mind
and create something that
would serve as a motivation
and inspiration for my life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Well, there was
actually a situation
that was caused by many
other events prior to that.
You know, I've
experienced-- prior to 2010,
Australian Open match
that you're referring to--
many struggles on the court.
Respiratory problems, inability
to cope with the heat, just
endurance issues.
Even though I was
training hard, I was--
you know, had, at
that time, the best
team that I could have for
myself with the fitness coach,
physiotherapist,
doctors, tennis coaches.
I had a complete
team fully devoted
to my high performance kind
of state of the body and mind.
But you know, I obviously
didn't understand
that there is this nutrition
part that was blocking me,
in a way, because I wasn't
eating correctly, even
though I thought that I was.
And I grew up, you
know, with my mom really
being cautious of how I
eat and how I think of food
and how I perceived food as
a fuel to make to my life
and to my body.
But you know, coming
from the culture where
we are based a lot on the
gluten, which is in the wheat,
and we have bakeries
on each corner,
so I had breads and different
bread baskets each day.
Basically, even
with eating pizza,
and I will have a little
bread on the side.
That's how integrated that
kind of culture of eating
was in our region.
And also, a lot of meat
and sugar, you know?
Refined sugar, and I only
knew about that kind of sugar.
I didn't know that
that would cause--
all of these things
would cause--
that kind of feeling of
being helpless on the court
and feeling of being
powerless, honestly.
So back in 2010 and playing
against Tsonga in Quarterfinals
of the Australian Open,
I was two sets to one up.
And it was a big challenge
playing against Jo,
and we played a few
years before that
in the Finals of
Australian Open.
And I was enjoying
that match, but I
was feeling that I'm losing
that kind of fuel in my tank.
For some reason, he was
just feeling stronger
and I was feeling weaker.
And then, all of the sudden,
the vision became different.
I didn't see the court
as wide as it was
at the beginning of the match.
And you know, I
had blurred vision.
I couldn't catch breath after
each point was finished.
And in no time, he was
a winner of the match.
And I remember that between
fourth and fifth set,
I went out to throw up and
felt my stomach was aching.
I felt my energy was so low, and
I was just, my nose was blocked
and there was plenty
of things going on.
And that was not the first time.
So then I had to
sit down, rethink
what is going on
because I didn't want
to go through that once again.
Because if I wanted
to achieve my goals
and to be the best in the
world and to win Grand Slams,
I had to win against
the best players
in the world like
like Tsonga was
at that time, or a Federer or
Nadal even on a higher level.
So I had to be ready
to play best of five,
you know, day after day.
But I wasn't, and I knew
that and I wanted to change.
I really had that
desire and willingness
to tackle the issues that I've
had, but I didn't know how
and didn't have access
to the right information.
I didn't have the right experts
and knowledgeable people
around me.
I did have some experts.
They were telling me
things that I already heard
and I was trying a
different inhalations
and different herbs.
I tried, you know, I had even
had a surgery of the nose
because I had a
little deviation, just
to kind of try to open up
the sinuses and channels
and kind of get
more oxygen flow.
But it was much more
simpler than that.
I just needed that
information about the change
of the diet and nutrition.
And it's, finally,
that's something
that I received in the second,
the mid part of the 2010
when I met Dr. Igor
Cetojevic, whom I've
met through mutual friends.
And he has actually watched
that match in Australian Open
earlier that year,
and he felt the need
to get in touch with
me and to help me out.
And through his
biofeedback machine,
a non-invasive therapy,
he received the data that
I'm just--
I have a very--
I have a great
sensitivity on gluten.
No celiac disease,
but great sensitivity,
intolerance to gluten,
to dairy products,
and obviously to refined sugar
as everybody in this world.
And so I made that
change and, after that,
my life was different.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I felt completely different
because the information
of the food, of whatever in
life could flow much better
and differently through
my body because I
didn't have those blockages.
I was not feeling,
anymore, clogged up.
I was not feeling that I have
literally stones in my channels
that were not allowing
information to flow.
And so when that changed,
the whole energy of the body
has since changed.
And all of a sudden, I
became more conscious.
I became more aware.
I've had more clarity of mind
and I could comprehend things
better, now.
And all of the sudden, it's like
my body has received that kind
of light and blessing, and
it's-- and the universe was
just, from that point on, just
feeding me with all the right
information.
And the circumstances in
life that I've had after that
were phenomenal.
And I am so, so privileged
to be able to keep
playing tennis on
that high level,
but yet, again, be so conscious
of myself on how I fuel my body
and how I perceive
things mentally.
And all of that, combined,
was just a thrill.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Well, I wish, honestly,
to first of all
be, myself, the change that
I want to see in the world,
that I want to
see in the people.
I think it's very powerful
thinking to change the world,
but you can't preach
to people because then
that's not the right energy.
It's not the right
information, right approach
because just people will not be
able to understand and receive
and absorb the information
that you send to them
if you're preaching to them,
if you know what I mean.
So I understood that,
the last couple of years.
I didn't understand
that at the beginning
because I was so excited
with that change in 2010.
And then in the
years after that,
I felt so strong as a
tennis player on the court
and I recovered better.
I had more endurance.
I had more clarity of mind.
All of the sudden, all
the horizons of life
opened up to me.
And I wanted to share that
with the people around me,
first of all; my
family, obviously;
and then the rest of the world.
But I haven't done
it in a proper way
because I was so excited that,
because of that excitement,
I kind of intruded, a little
bit, the space and the thinking
of the people around me.
And it took me a bit of
a while to understand,
how am I able to share this?
First of all, you
know, it's only
the beginning of the evolution.
I feel like there is
so much to discover
and there's so much to receive
I just need to be open for it.
But then, second of
all, I would like
to share it at the same
time because I see and feel
the change in my life.
And regardless of my
profession, everybody
wants to be healthy, right?
Everybody wants to
thrive in well-being.
So I felt like I have
discovered something,
and being in such a
privileged position
and having a status of
one of the top athletes,
I could leverage that position
and in kind of conveying
that kind of message.
So that was the thinking I
had ever since that change.
But up to recently, I was
figuring it out, in what way
I can leverage that,
I can use that.
And so through the
films and through
various different
initiatives and projects
that we have in mind, I really
hope to touch people as with it
partially, with the first book.
We're creating the
second one as well.
So you know, it's all
about, first of all,
not finding yourself,
but creating
yourself starting from
that kind of sense
of mind and willingness
to learn and willingness
to receive the
information, willingness
to go inside, go inwards,
tap into that inner voice.
Because the self-talk is
the talk with universe.
You know, we all have to
be kind of aware of that.
And you know, next
thing you know,
there's a huge wave of
consciousness and awareness
and knowledge that
comes your way.
You're not even
thinking about it,
but you're receiving
it because you're
kind of tuned into that
eternal source of divine light.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Oh, well, I try to start the day
being really grateful to have
another opportunity to live,
and to really sense my body,
to breathe in and
out deeply few times,
and just realize how
blessed I am to be healthy,
to have a family, to be
able to eat great quality
organic living foods, to be able
to play the sport that I love,
and to have the opportunity
to influence people
in a positive way.
And so it's endless
list of things
that you can be grateful for,
so that's the first thing.
That's the first thought
I start my day with.
And obviously, my
day is even better
if I have my wife in my
bed next to me, which
is not the case all
the time because
of the nature of my work.
But after that, it's all about,
generally speaking, fueling
your body with the
right nutrients.
You know, I think it's
important for everybody
to discover what it
is that they should
fuel their body with so
they can get rid of toxins--
physical toxins, mental
toxins, emotional toxins,
spiritual toxins.
And the easiest and
maybe most simplest
way to start with getting rid
of all the emotional luggage
that you carry and all
these blockages and toxins
is to start eating correctly.
And any kind of form
of living food--
you know, vegetables,
fruits, grains, seeds, nuts,
cold-pressed oils, you know,
anything of that is plant-based
and that is organic--
is just, it's an energy,
pure energy to your body.
And I try to start with that.
Obviously, I have
cold-pressed juices.
I love the green
juices in the morning.
I get a little detox
because, up to 12 o'clock,
around noon, it's usually
your bio-clock for detox,
and I try to get those
liquids in as much as I can.
I get some of the acai
bowls or a matcha bowl
or superfood smoothies.
You know, just not getting
as much as I can, but I
do make a break
in-between and generally
just trying to nurture
my body and cherish
the fact that I have
this awareness about it
and what it does to me.
Now, of course,
everybody's different,
but one thing is for
sure, the living foods,
the organic foods,
non-processed foods
are the best thing that you
can fuel your body with.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Well, we talk about toxins,
right, getting rid of toxins.
And stress is probably the
biggest toxin that we have,
today, and biggest
opposer to our health
and to our prosperity.
So I think that, again, you
should start with getting rid
of toxins, in order
to thrive and not
just survive in our type of
understanding and approach
to life.
Because I feel like there's
this majority of people,
today, they are just
eating to survive,
just eating to
fill their stomach,
and just move on with
whatever day they were doing.
But, you know, I think
it's important to have
that conscience and information
of how the food that you get
as a fuel in your body
affects everything,
you know, affects your energy
levels, affects your health,
your well-being.
Because in the end of the
day, when you become a father
as I was so blessed to
do a couple of years ago,
your life changes.
Your priority changes
and, all of the sudden,
everything you do is--
has meaning, has sense,
because you're doing it
for a little creature
that is growing up
that is waiting for
your love and compassion
and directions in life.
And they are such
little masters.
We can learn so much from them,
to be in the present moment,
to move from one moment to
another without feeling guilt
and without carrying
that luggage behind.
And they, you know, every day
is amazing to see the evolution
and development of children.
And you realize, at that point,
that it's not about yourself
anymore.
It's about your family, about
your wife and your child,
but that can be a bit
tricky for your mind.
Because then you
would think, well, I'm
not so important anymore
to be unto myself.
Now, it's all about them
being healthy, being well-fed,
being happy, joyful.
And then, you know, many
people would just kind of
jeopardize their own health,
sacrifice their own routines
and of eating good, just
exercising, surrounding
yourself with positivity
and right thinking,
and dedicating the time to your
self-work and evolution because
of the noble thought,
which is the noble thought
to take care of your family.
But what good are you for
them if you are not healthy,
if you don't have that
wellness, right, in every aspect
of your being and your life?
So I think that the best way--
I think, that's the right
example is in the family--
best way for you to
evoke and kind of trigger
the change in people around you
is through to work on yourself
and to be the example,
to be that change
that you want to see in others.
And I think that kind of mindset
should be present in people
because it's--
in the end of the day, as I
said, everybody's, different.
My diet is based 90%
on plant-based diet.
And I have, occasionally,
fish, and that's all
from the animal-based foods.
And I have made that decision
because of the passion
towards the food and the
willingness to discover more,
to learn more.
And I found it the most
thriving for my body,
but that doesn't
necessarily mean
that it's the same for every
single one on this planet.
So I think each one
should get curious,
as every single child on
this planet is curious.
Just understand that
the fuel for your body
is is the strength,
is the energy
that carries you in the life.
And it's same with a car.
You go to the gas station,
and if you put a wrong fuel
in your car, your car might
go for a certain time,
but the engine will be
broken, the car will not
go after a certain
time, will not function.
Same with your metabolism.
Your body is structured in such
a complex and intelligent way,
you know, from divine
energy in universe
that it's smart enough to
heal itself, to run itself,
If you are feeding it
with the right information
through food, through your
surrounding, through whatever
you do in your life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Absolutely.
Well, she gave me
the foundations
of who I am, self-belief, the
courageous, I'd say, approach
to the tennis world, to dreams.
As every child, I
was very curious
and I was very much in love
with what I did and I just
wanted to play.
And I am so grateful
to my parents
that they had faith
in Jelena Gencic
and they allowed her
to be the influence
that she was in my life.
Because, you know, people
keep forgetting that,
but it's such an important
factor where parents really
have enough trust in a person
that is not part of the family
to be able to influence
you like that person
is part of the family.
So that was the case,
and I spent a lot of time
at home, her house,
and listening
to the classical music
and having visualizations
and observing the different
video materials of the both man
and woman champions at
that time, you know,
picking up the right things,
talking about tennis,
talking about the
technical stuff,
and just talking about
life, in general.
And you know, the combination
between her and my parents
was a formula of success
for me because they have--
I have inherited that kind of
mental strength and an ability
to really believe
in myself and trust
in my instincts, my intuition.
And even though
that I have grown up
in such circumstances
that would appear
a bit unrealistic for a young
tennis player to succeed
and into professional
waters and eventually
become number one in
the world, you know,
I still was very fortunate.
I need to thank the
universe for that,
for allowing me to be surrounded
with the right people,
you know, with the
right heart and passion.
And they all cared about me and
they cared about my growing up.
And I think the
holistic approach
that I have today towards the
tennis and life in general
has started with Jelena Gencic
and because she was not just
a tennis coach.
You know?
I still didn't meet
too many people that
would listen to classical music
in between of training sessions
and poetry and talk about life
and learn different languages.
And she wanted to
make me, together
with my parents, a
complete person, somebody
that is able to master
himself, first, and then
and then others, after that.
So I'm very grateful
to have her in my life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Oh, it has been an
essential tool in my life
on the tennis court and
off the tennis court.
And I'm so devoted, right
now, at this stage of my life,
to the spiritual growth much
more than material growth.
I believe that material
growth comes as a consequence
to your spiritual growth, your
human growth, your character
growth.
So I have been really trying
each day to take some time
and be mindful of who I
am, you know, meditate,
go through breathing
exercises, or just sit there
with eyes closed or with
eyes open and observe nature
and try to inhale that
power of nature and power
of divine light.
Because essentially,
we are all life.
We all come from that source.
And you know, I really
cannot, right now,
imagine myself without that.
And know, you can
always correct yourself.
We go back to that
subject of talking
about how complex and
intelligent the body is
and how quickly it can reset.
And if we allow it to
reset, if we close our eyes
and be in the present moment
and observe the thoughts--
not influence them, not control
them, but observe them--
we are allowing our body to be
filled with the divine light,
to be connected with the
universe, to calm our thoughts,
and finally to reset,
regroup, correct.
Because we are all people,
and with the society
that we live in and with
the world that surrounds us,
this is normal
that each day we go
through certain positive
and negative vibrations
and influences.
And it all has its impact
on our mind, body, and soul.
And so that's why it's
important to approach life
from that holistic
overview and understand
that each aspect of your
being needs some caring.
You need some nurturing.
And mindfulness
is something that
has helped me to regain
my emotional stability,
my mental strength in the
toughest moments on the court
with just closing the eyes
and inhaling two, three
times and just, first of all,
being present, being conscious
about the possibility to
play the tennis, again,
to be at that level, because
sometimes we do take it
for granted.
And then the fact that
I'm there for a reason
and that I'm open to
whatever circumstances that
are coming my way.
So I, you know, we've been
trained a little bit by society
to think too much in advance,
too much in the future
to prepare for what's coming
up and to be kind of linked too
much and connected to the past.
Where I think that the past
is something that has already
happened-- we can't
influence it--
and we should learn
from it and move on.
And future is not
in our hands, and we
should try not to expect,
but be grateful for whatever
is coming our way and thrive
and strive to be in the moment.
And that's something that
children can teach us so much,
and that's why they are masters.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Well, it started from the very
early days of my tennis life
and tennis career,
where I was taught
to stretch and to
take care of my body
because then I'm going to have
the longevity and an enduring
career.
And as I moved on
into life, I did
go through several
tough injuries,
as every athlete goes
through, that have
made you wonder whether you're
doing things the right way
or not.
Because each injury has some
kind of message behind that
you need to kind of unlock
and discover what it is.
So you know, the last big injury
I've had was back in 2011.
I've had an amazing season and
I've played a lot of matches,
but I got carried away and
maybe played too much, chased
too much, and I got that
karmic slap in my face.
And I had an injury
that took me off
from the tour for
about two months,
and I started rethinking.
And then, you know,
I strongly believe
in order to reach another
climax in your life,
you need to have a little drop.
And those kind of, if you
want to call them failures--
which I don't consider
failures, I just consider them
as a result of what you do
and who you are in life--
can teach us something.
And you can move on from
that as a stronger person
and as a Phoenix rises
and even more capable.
Or you can let that
weight on your shoulder
take you even further down.
So I have fortunately
have been, again,
surrounded with the people that
have been very encouraging.
They have been very thoughtful,
and have lifted me up
when I needed that the most.
Because finally, you know,
you're not alone in this world,
and there are things that
you cannot always handle
by yourself.
Surely, it all
starts and ends here,
and you need to do your
work, that work, yourself.
But yet again, you need that
kind of positive assessment
from outside.
You need that help,
that guidance,
in a way, to help you
battle that inner battles
in a right way, the
ego and the fears
and the doubts that
I've been through a lot
and that, again, have
happened for a reason.
They needed to be there through
the course of my life in order
for me to reach the
climax that I have.
But it's a constant
learning curve.
It's a constant evolution
and progress forward.
Otherwise, it's a regression.
There is no stagnation.
You know, everything in
life is moving forward,
so I always have that
in back of my mind.
And the yoga, the stretching,
the new informations through
exercises, through
mindfulness, through
spiritual
enlightenment, whatever
I receive today and the
next days, I'm open for it
and I know that it's there for
a reason for me to get better,
to progress, and evolve
my soul in this life.
Because finally,
you know, our souls
have been through so
many lives and this is--
it's neverending.
And once again, talking
about the soul life,
once I've reached that
kind of discovery,
it was something huge.
And obviously, we're not
taught by the society
that there are other lives.
You know it's the life that you
have right now, you're born,
you die, and that's it.
But it's not.
You know, you have a soul that
has descended into your body
and has given you the
opportunities, given
opportunity to your parents,
to have the material form
and to live in
this material life.
So try to use it in
the best way possible
so you can improve
yourself, improve your soul,
and evolve for the next life.
And I maybe went too far,
because your question was
about yoga and
stretching, but I just
felt that I had to share this
because it's much, I would say,
more complex and
it reaches further,
I would say, horizons than just
doing a stretch on a hamstring,
if you know what I mean.
By doing that, you should be
able to tune into your body
and breathe through it and
have a little more stretch.
But be conscious of
that moment, you know,
not typing in the
phones and stuff.
And those are things that
I'm still learning myself
because there are moments
when I'm completely,
as I should be, you
know, when I'm stretching
or when I'm eating.
I'm there.
I'm sending my
energy to the food.
I'm sending my energy
to yoga exercises,
and receiving the
energy back because I'm
one with the nature,
I'm one with myself
and with the divine source.
But there are moments when
I tend to forget that,
and that's why it's a
process of evolution for me
and everybody else.
And if I may share the one
more thing that is, you know,
probably the biggest, one
of the biggest informations
that I got lately is the fact
that inner work, self work,
is the biggest work that
you can have in your life.
You know, we think
that building a biceps
in the gym over the course
of, whatever, a couple weeks
or months or I don't know,
getting yourself ready
for an Ironman competition is
the biggest work we can do,
but it's not.
You know, it's that inner work.
It's that courage and ability
to fight with your own fears,
to handle your own
thoughts, and to understand
that you can't control
things in life, that you
can be in harmony with yourself
only if you're working on
yourself.
If you go inside, if you
are mindful, you meditate,
you try to surround
yourself with
the right positive
environment, people
that raise your vibrations,
raise your frequency.
And it's also exciting
because, every day,
there is something to work
on, if you know I mean.
Not in a material way, but
in a spiritual, human way.
And material in a
spiritual way combined
is the evolution like not other.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
First of all, I'm so
privileged to be successful
and to have this status of
top athlete and influence.
But the fact that on there,
you know, is due to the help
that I had from so many people,
I haven't done it alone.
And having that always
in the back of my mind
helps me understand that there
is such a vast world of people
that, unfortunately,
with all their talents
and dreams and
aspirations are not
able to succeed
because they don't have
either the conditions
or support or access
to education, to
most basic needs.
And that is why, back in 2007,
with my parents and my family,
we have founded the Novak
Djokovic Foundation.
And until 2011, we have
helped in many different ways
to people in need.
You know, it's people with
medical conditions to education
through different programs.
But back into 2011, we
my wife also joined in
and we have decided that we
need a purpose of foundation.
We need that direction.
We need a mission.
And we need to be able
to devote to one goal,
and that was education,
pre-school education,
to be precise, in Serbia.
Because unfortunately, over
50% of children in Serbia
are not attending any preschool,
programs or institutions,
some due to financial
issues and some
to the cultural comprehension
of what those kindergartens
and preschool institutions
and programs represent.
So we're really,
as a team, trying
to spread the awareness
about importance of education
as a foundation of growth
because, finally, education
is something that nobody can
really take away from you.
It's something that you
have, that you possess,
that you have earned.
And to see people,
to see children smile
and to see them so
joyful and happy
in their schools
and kindergartens
and their playgrounds is
something that you can't pay.
There is no value.
There is no price to that.
It just fills your heart
with joy, with light,
with everything.
Because, you know, we all talk
about leaving a better world
for our children, and the
world is left on our children,
but let's also create
that kind of world that--
where they are able to thrive
and not survive, you know?
And I'm so grateful
to all the team
from foundation on
their contribution
and the work they do.
We have a fantastic
team of people.
But we are still a
young foundation.
You know, it takes
a long time for us
to really establish big global
institutions which, hopefully,
one day we'll do.
But right now, we're focused
on Serbia, naturally,
because my wife and I, my
family come from Serbia,
and we see so many
different issues
that need some resolving,
that need some help.
And through the
foundation, I try
to give back as much as I can
as a successful professional
athlete, but also through
many other ways personally
that it's part of my life.
It's part of who I am.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Amor y Paz, it's love and peace.
And it's so simple,
but yet so powerful.
It's a philosophy of
life, but it's also
a program, a group that
my brother is part of.
My brother lives
in Marbella, Spain,
where we are at the
moment and where
we tend to come to visit
him as much as we can.
And he's collaborating
and working
in this group with his former
coach and his life coach
Pepe Imaz, who is a creator and
a founder of that Amor y Paz
group that essentially
shares love,
shares love in every
aspect of their being,
in every way possible
that they can.
And whether you
are playing tennis
or you're doing sports or
whatever, whoever you are,
you're welcome as the common
human being filled with love.
And that's how they treat you.
And finally, it's treating
everybody the same.
We are all kids of divine
light and that's what I feel
and that's what you feel
when you're part of that Love
and Peace in motion, that
group of people that prays
for your soul to thrive,
prays for your soul
to have love and have light.
And it's happening more.
I feel like there
is consciousness
in the world, globally,
that is changing
that is looking towards
finding that love,
finding that connection with
yourself, with other people.
And you know, today,
with everything
that is happening in this
world, the horrific things,
there is a part of the
world and maybe society
that is trying to divide
nations, divide people.
But you know,
essentially, there is
this global overall
profound energy that
connects us all together.
So as much as we, as people,
try to divide ourselves
into religions, cultures,
colors of the skin
or face or whatever, differences
that you can come up with,
we are drawn together.
And that's what the
philosophy of Amor y Paz is,
and the Love and Peace because
we all want peace in the world,
right.
But there are so many
different kind of obstacles
and influences and dark energies
that are surrounding us,
that are waiting for
every possible chance
and opportunity,
while we are weak,
to tackle and to take
over control of us.
And then our ego surfaces,
and then we feel powerful.
We feel like we own the
people, we own the planet,
we own nature.
And that's when the worst
things happen, right?
We're doing a lot
of harm to animals,
to planet, nature,
to other people.
We're Destroying things.
And we were created to
build, to construct,
to evolve, to thrive,
to love, because that's
the essence of who we are
and that's what's fueling us
and that's what is our
mission on this planet.
And the other day,
I was meditating
with Pepe and my brother.
And Pepe was talking
about, you know,
the essence of our existence
here, of our presence,
and who we are
and the evolution.
And we had a wonderful
moment together
where you could feel that
our energies connected.
And it's when it came
to me that in a simple,
let's say, translation
into words and thoughts.
It can be perceived
as making it--
or make it, live it,
and share it, right?
Because the first
part of your life,
you tend to create yourself,
not find yourself, create.
You know, you were
curious as a child.
You have different aspirations.
You have a different dreams.
You want to try
everything in life,
until you finally
figure out what it is
and you make something, right?
And then you live it.
You try to find that
courage and that boldness
to really be bold enough to live
that and to serve as an example
to everybody else.
And then, in the end, share it.
Because that final
stage of, let's say,
evolution is really sharing
it with everybody else.
Because you're not going
to take your energy,
your feelings, your
knowledge, your information,
everything that you have learned
or received or comprehended
throughout your life with you,
in your body, in your grave.
I mean, you're not going
to take that with you.
You're going to need to
share it because that's
the whole point of our existence
with each other, you know?
Because we are drawn
to each other and we
need to be able to
kind of correlate
and collaborate and share
the information and thoughts
and emotions in order to
ascend as spiritual beings.
And that's was something
that, you know,
fills my heart whenever I think
about it, whenever I live it,
whenever I share.
[MUSIC PLAYING]